<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
<title>QT4 CG Meeting 114 Minutes 2025-03-18</title>
<meta name="generator" content="Org Mode" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="/img/QT4-64.png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="64x64" href="/img/QT4-64.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="76x76" href="/img/QT4-76.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="120x120" href="/img/QT4-120.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="152x152" href="/img/QT4-152.png" type="image/png" />
<script>
  window.MathJax = {
    tex: {
      ams: {
        multlineWidth: '85%'
      },
      tags: 'ams',
      tagSide: 'right',
      tagIndent: '.8em'
    },
    chtml: {
      scale: 1.0,
      displayAlign: 'center',
      displayIndent: '0em'
    },
    svg: {
      scale: 1.0,
      displayAlign: 'center',
      displayIndent: '0em'
    },
    output: {
      font: 'mathjax-modern',
      displayOverflow: 'overflow'
    }
  };
</script>

<script
  id="MathJax-script"
  async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
</script>
</head>
<body>
<div id="content" class="content">
<h1 class="title">QT4 CG Meeting 114 Minutes 2025-03-18</h1>
<p>
<a href="../">Meeting index</a> / <a href="https://qt4cg.org">QT4CG.org</a> / <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard">Dashboard</a> / <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues">GH Issues</a> / <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pulls">GH Pull Requests</a>
</p>

<div id="table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<ul>
<li><a href="#minutes">Draft Minutes</a></li>
<li><a href="#new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/4]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#administrivia">1. Administrivia</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#roll-call">1.1. Roll call <code>[11/13]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#agenda">1.2. Accept the agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#so-far">1.2.1. Status so far…</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#approve-minutes">1.3. Approve minutes of the previous meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#next-meeting">1.4. Next meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#open-actions">1.5. Review of open action items <code>[2/7]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#open-pull-requests">1.6. Review of open pull requests and issues</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#blocked">1.6.1. Blocked</a></li>
<li><a href="#merge-without-discussion">1.6.2. Merge without discussion</a></li>
<li><a href="#close-without-action">1.6.3. Close without action</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#technical-agenda">2. Technical agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#technical-prs">2.1. Review of pull requests</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#pr-1877">2.1.1. PR #1877: 1866 Disambiguate TypeSpecifier syntax</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1882">2.1.2. PR #1882: 982 Editorial rewrite of scan-left and scan-right</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1879">2.1.3. PR #1879: 1857, 1860: Add more options to parse-xml</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1856">2.1.4. PR #1856: 998 Add boundary and lookahead/behind assertions</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1867">2.1.5. PR #1867: 1341 Drop position from fold callbacks</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-1883">2.1.6. PR #1883: 882 Replace fn:chain by fn:compose</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#any-other-business">3. Any other business</a></li>
<li><a href="#adjourned">4. Adjourned</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-minutes" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="minutes">Draft Minutes</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-minutes">
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-new-actions" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/4]</code></h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-new-actions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-082-02: DN to work with NW to come to agreement on the fn:ranks proposal</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-107-05: JLO and DN to consider a proposal for system defined records.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-110-04: JK to consider a PR for #366, xsl:use-package with xsl:package-location</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-112-01: JLO to propose a concrete example that uses “.” in a ~%method~s.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-113-02: NW to investigate a way to show extra attributes in the syntax summary.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-administrivia" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="administrivia"><span class="section-number-2">1.</span> Administrivia</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-administrivia">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-roll-call" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="roll-call"><span class="section-number-3">1.1.</span> Roll call <code>[11/13]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-roll-call">
<p>
Regrets: BTW.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> David J Birnbaum (DB)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Reece Dunn (RD)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Sasha Firsov (SF)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Christian Grün (CG)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Joel Kalvesmaki (JK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Michael Kay (MK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Juri Leino (JLO)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> John Lumley (JWL)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Dimitre Novatchev (DN)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Wendell Piez (WP)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Ed Porter (EP)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Bethan Tovey-Walsh (BTW)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Norm Tovey-Walsh (NW). <i>Scribe</i>. <i>Chair</i>.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-agenda" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="agenda"><span class="section-number-3">1.2.</span> Accept the agenda</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-agenda">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../agenda/2025/03-11.html">the agenda</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-so-far" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="so-far"><span class="section-number-4">1.2.1.</span> Status so far…</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-so-far">
<p>
These charts have been adjusted so they reflect the preceding six months of work.
</p>


<div id="org7a680c8" class="figure">
<p><img src="./issues-open-2025-03-18.png" alt="issues-open-2025-03-18.png" />
</p>
<p><span class="figure-number">Figure 1: </span>“Burn down” chart on open issues</p>
</div>


<div id="org9e58d83" class="figure">
<p><img src="./issues-by-spec-2025-03-18.png" alt="issues-by-spec-2025-03-18.png" />
</p>
<p><span class="figure-number">Figure 2: </span>Open issues by specification</p>
</div>


<div id="org429c86c" class="figure">
<p><img src="./issues-by-type-2025-03-18.png" alt="issues-by-type-2025-03-18.png" />
</p>
<p><span class="figure-number">Figure 3: </span>Open issues by type</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-approve-minutes" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="approve-minutes"><span class="section-number-3">1.3.</span> Approve minutes of the previous meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-approve-minutes">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../minutes/2025/03-11.html">the minutes of the previous meeting</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-next-meeting" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="next-meeting"><span class="section-number-3">1.4.</span> Next meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-next-meeting">
<p>
The next meeting is scheduled for 25 March 2025.
</p>

<p>
Note: The QT4CG meeting is scheduled on UK/European civil time. The United
States switched to daylight saving time on 9 March 2025, so the meeting of
25 March will be one hour later there (12:00 EDT, 09:00 PDT) until the
UK/Europe also switches (on 30 March 2024).
</p>

<p>
No regrets heard.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-actions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-actions"><span class="section-number-3">1.5.</span> Review of open action items <code>[2/7]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-actions">
<p>
(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-082-02: DN to work with NW to come to agreement on the fn:ranks proposal</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-107-05: JLO and DN to consider a proposal for system defined records.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-110-04: JK to consider a PR for #366, xsl:use-package with xsl:package-location</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-112-01: JLO to propose a concrete example that uses “.” in a ~%method~s.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-113-01: MK to make a PR to drop the position callback on fold-left/fold-right</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-113-02: NW to investigate a way to show extra attributes in the syntax summary.</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> QT4CG-113-03: JWL to consider shadow attributes and all the other standard attributes on xsl:record.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-pull-requests" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-pull-requests"><span class="section-number-3">1.6.</span> Review of open pull requests and issues</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-pull-requests">
<p>
This section summarizes all of the issues and pull requests that need to be
resolved before we can finish. See <a href="#technical-agenda">Technical Agenda</a> below for the focus of this
meeting.
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-blocked" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="blocked"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.1.</span> Blocked</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-blocked">
<p>
The following PRs are open but have merge conflicts or comments which
suggest they aren’t ready for action.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1283">#1283</a>: 77b Update expressions</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1062">#1062</a>: 150bis revised proposal for fn:ranks</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-merge-without-discussion" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="merge-without-discussion"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.2.</span> Merge without discussion</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-merge-without-discussion">
<p>
The following PRs are editorial, small, or otherwise appeared to be
uncontroversial when the agenda was prepared. The chairs propose that
these can be merged without discussion. If you think discussion is
necessary, please say so.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1880">#1880</a>: Editorial revision of fn:function-identity</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1878">#1878</a>: 1851 Make ?variety optional; explain namespace-sensitive</li>
<li><del>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1875">#1875</a>: 1861 Params passed automatically through next-match</del></li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1873">#1873</a>: 1869 duplicate values</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Merge without discussion, except for #1875
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-close-without-action" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="close-without-action"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.3.</span> Close without action</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-close-without-action">
<p>
It has been proposed that the following issues be closed without action.
If you think discussion is necessary, please say so.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Issue <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/1863">#1863</a>: add \U \u L \u \E to replace() (case conversion)</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Close without any further action.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-technical-agenda" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="technical-agenda"><span class="section-number-2">2.</span> Technical agenda</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-technical-agenda">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-technical-prs" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="technical-prs"><span class="section-number-3">2.1.</span> Review of pull requests</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-technical-prs">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1877" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="pr-1877"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.1.</span> PR #1877: 1866 Disambiguate TypeSpecifier syntax</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-pr-1877">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1877">#1877</a>
</p>

<p>
I was tempted to mark this one merge-without-discussion, but let’s see if we all
agree on the proposed syntactic change.
</p>

<p>
Proposal: Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1882" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="pr-1882"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.2.</span> PR #1882: 982 Editorial rewrite of scan-left and scan-right</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-pr-1882">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1882">#1882</a>
</p>

<p>
I was tempted to mark this one merge-without-discussion, but there’s an open
comment on the PR (but not an especially substantive one, AFAICT).
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I thought that scan-left and scan-right should be in the same style.</li>
<li>CG: The simple map operator doesn’t have a formal equivalent.</li>
<li>MK: Yes, reducing the number of constructs is usefull</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of other primitives; we’re using for-each a lot.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: Aspirationally, I’d like to get the equivalents to be on primitives in the
data model.</li>
<li>DN: Speaking of primitives; for-each can be expressed using fold-left or
fold-right.</li>
<li>MK: Or recursion.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accepted, without futher edits.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1879" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="pr-1879"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.3.</span> PR #1879: 1857, 1860: Add more options to parse-xml</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-pr-1879">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1879">#1879</a>
</p>

<p>
I was tempted to mark this one merge-without-discussion, but some brief
discussion of <code>entity-expansion-limit</code> may be in order.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I did a revision in the light of the comment on <code>entity-expansion-limit</code>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
MK reviews the options on <code>fn:parse-xml()</code>.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: Expanding an external entity can change the base URI for entities within
<b>that</b> entity…but I don’t think anyone is likely to misread that.</li>

<li>NW: Many XPointer schemes aren’t supportable by a streaming implementation in
the parser.</li>

<li>JLO: What do you do if you have an override? Is it then an error?</li>
<li>MK: I think we should leave it up to the implementation.</li>
<li>WP: Thank you, this is awesome. Point of clarification, numeric character
references are also allowed (even if entity expansion is allowed).
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… It might also be nice to have some examples.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: There’s always room for more tutorial material.</li>
<li>RD: Should we put a note in about potential security issue? One of the reasons
to limit entity expansion is to prevent malicious “billion laughs” attacks.</li>
<li>NW: I’m reluctant.</li>
<li>WP: I don’t think we should explain how to attack the parser.</li>
<li>RD: A caution on setting the limit too high.</li>
<li>CG: I would agree that if you’re looking for entity expansion limit on the
web, you’ll find lots of answers.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1856" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="pr-1856"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.4.</span> PR #1856: 998 Add boundary and lookahead/behind assertions</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-pr-1856">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1856">#1856</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This PR basically replaces the whole regular expression section with a new
one.</li>
<li>MK: We now have a processing model for regular expressions that allows us to
define some terms.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Some attempt to standardize terminology for capture groups and capturing
subexpressions.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
The rules for regular expression matching in different libraries are often
incompletely specified. It’s possible that the rules here aren’t precisely the
same as other libraries.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: The constraint on lookbehind is stronger than some, but it means you don’t
have to backtrack.</li>
<li>MK: The flags are unchanged; the semantics of some of the functions has been
clarified.</li>
<li>MK: Functions like <code>fn:tokenize()</code> now allow the regular expression to match a
zero-length string and define rules for what it means.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… It’s common to split a string into characters if the regex matches the
zero length strings. But, again, there’s lots of variation in the libraries.</li>
</ul></li>

<li>RD: Do we specify a minimum version of Unicode? That will effect what the
character classes match and what languages are available.</li>
<li>MK: I think we recommend implementations to support the latest, but we don’t
impose any constraints.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of whether we should impose a constraint.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: Would it be worth adding a note that the Unicode group matching is
dependent on the version of Unicode.</li>
<li>MK: We probably get some of that from XSD 1.1.</li>
<li>JK: I’m grateful, this must have been a lot of work.</li>
<li>JLO: I really like the changes; my only question is what lead to the decision
to split on space instead of between characters when the string is a zero
length.</li>
<li>MK: That’s not new; tokenize with no regular expression was already defined in
3.1 to split on space boundaries.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of how to split; the empty string will work.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: Could the grammar be written in the same style as the XPath 3.1 grammar?</li>
<li>MK: Yes. The semantics of having more than one grammar might be a bit tricky.</li>
<li>RD: Don’t we have that with XSLT?</li>
<li>MK: No, there’s only one grammar in the document.</li>
<li>JWL: Where is the other grammar in F&amp;O? The grammars for XPath don’t appear in
here.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1867" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="pr-1867"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.5.</span> PR #1867: 1341 Drop position from fold callbacks</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-pr-1867">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1867">#1867</a>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: The main thing to be aware of is that it involved changing a number of the
formal expansions of other functions. For example, <code>fn:replicate</code> is no longer
easily defined in terms of <code>fn:fold-left</code>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: Accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-1883" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="pr-1883"><span class="section-number-4">2.1.6.</span> PR #1883: 882 Replace fn:chain by fn:compose</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-pr-1883">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1883">#1883</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR and reviews the examples.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: One key difference is that the this function is going to be most useful
when it’s going to be reused.</li>
<li>MK: I was most motivated by the use of the compose in a callback function.</li>
<li>MK: It’s simpler than <code>fn:chain</code>, it returns a function rather than applying
the function and it doesn’t handle the complexity of handling functions with
arities other than one.</li>
<li>DN: I fully approve of <code>fn:compose</code>, but I think there’s a questionable thing as well.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… There’s no way to compare <code>fn:compose</code> to <code>fn:chain</code>. The <code>fn:chain</code>
function provides more functionality than <code>fn:compose</code> in every case.</li>
<li>… There is a difference of quality here.</li>
<li>… One of the main differences, one of the things that <code>fn:chain</code> provides,
is the ability to have multiple arguments.</li>
<li>… In <code>fn:chain</code>, there are 25 examples and in 8 of them, there’s a function
with arity greater than one.</li>
<li>… One might say that such functionality is rarely used. But that’s like
saying an airplane is rarely used. That’s true, but it’s very useful.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>JLO: I am not a fan of <code>fn:chain</code> and I’d be happy with just <code>fn:compose</code>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
There’s a typo in the last example: “let”.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JLO: Trying to combine functions with variable arity using <code>fn:chain</code> has a
lot of edge cases. I like this better.</li>
<li>MK: My main thinking on this was that if you know statically what functions
you want to call, it’s very easy to compose them using the arrow operator. The
case for the compose function is when you have dynamic functions to compose.
With <code>fn:chain</code> as it’s currently defined, you have to know what the arities
are so it’s hard to find examples of creating a completely flexible function
chain. I found that logic complex; it’s going to sometimes work, but I found
it frustrating.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I also trying to exercise some discipline, removing something to prevent
duplication.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>RD: Would it be possible to restrict <code>fn:compose</code> to functions of the same
arity.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Discussion to continue.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-any-other-business" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="any-other-business"><span class="section-number-2">3.</span> Any other business</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-any-other-business">
<p>
Should we revisit EXPath Archive?
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: I’m concerned about our workload.</li>
<li>CG: Some concerns as MK, I’d like to spend time on it, but I want to do some
other things first.</li>
<li>WP: Is there overlap with XProc?</li>
<li>NW: I’m not sure.</li>
<li>JWL: I can convert it to the new system and we can decide if we want to do it.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… There is work to be done; it isn’t just a matter of updating the spec.</li>
<li>… We’d need an implementor.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
Consensus does not seem to be for taking this work on now.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-adjourned" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="adjourned"><span class="section-number-2">4.</span> Adjourned</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-adjourned">
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
