<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html;charset=utf-8" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />
<title>QT4 CG Meeting 129 Minutes 2025-07-15</title>
<meta name="generator" content="Org Mode" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/meeting/css/htmlize.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../css/style.css"/>
<link rel="shortcut icon" href="/img/QT4-64.png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="64x64" href="/img/QT4-64.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="76x76" href="/img/QT4-76.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="120x120" href="/img/QT4-120.png" type="image/png" />
<link rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="152x152" href="/img/QT4-152.png" type="image/png" />
</head>
<body>
<div id="content" class="content">
<h1 class="title">QT4 CG Meeting 129 Minutes 2025-07-15</h1>
<p>
<a href="../">Meeting index</a> / <a href="https://qt4cg.org">QT4CG.org</a> / <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard">Dashboard</a> / <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues">GH Issues</a> / <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/pulls">GH Pull Requests</a>
</p>

<div id="table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<h2>Table of Contents</h2>
<div id="text-table-of-contents" role="doc-toc">
<ul>
<li><a href="#minutes">Minutes</a></li>
<li><a href="#new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/9]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#administrivia">1. Administrivia</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#roll-call">1.1. Roll call <code>[9/12]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#agenda">1.2. Accept the agenda</a></li>
<li><a href="#approve-minutes">1.3. Approve minutes of the previous meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#next-meeting">1.4. Next meeting</a></li>
<li><a href="#open-actions">1.5. Review of open action items <code>[0/6]</code></a></li>
<li><a href="#open-pull-requests">1.6. Review of open pull requests and issues</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#blocked">1.6.1. Blocked</a></li>
<li><a href="#merge-without-discussion">1.6.2. Merge without discussion</a></li>
<li><a href="#close-without-action">1.6.3. Close without action</a></li>
<li><a href="#substantive">1.6.4. Substantive PRs</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#technical-agenda">2. Technical agenda</a>
<ul>
<li><a href="#h-E26407E8-EB3B-4D13-B605-81347EE4D5FF">2.1. JNodes/Generalized path expressions</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-2094">2.2. PR #2094: 2003 Generalize Map Constructors</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-2014">2.3. PR #2014: QT4CG-122-01 Add notes, examples, and rationale for xsl:select</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-2019">2.4. PR #2019: 1776: XSLT template rules for maps and array</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-2037">2.5. PR #2037: 2036 Add rule for streamability of xsl:map</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-2043">2.6. PR #2043: 2038 Tweak the rules for fn:apply-templates references to modes</a></li>
<li><a href="#pr-2011">2.7. PR #2011: 675(part): Add XSLT static typing rules for new kinds of XPath expression</a></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><a href="#any-other-business">3. Any other business</a></li>
<li><a href="#adjourned">4. Adjourned</a></li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-minutes" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="minutes">Minutes</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-minutes">
<p>
Approved <a href="../2025/07-22.html">at meeting 130</a> on 22 July 2025.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-new-actions" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="new-actions">Summary of new and continuing actions <code>[0/9]</code></h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-new-actions">
<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-082-02: DN to work with NW to come to agreement on the fn:ranks proposal</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-112-01: JLO to propose a concrete example that uses “.” in a ~%method~s.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-116-01: Add a specific error code for unsupported options on doc and doc-available</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-118-01: MK to make an incorrect type raise an error in #1906</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-123-01: MK to do the set example in XQuery.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-127-01: NW to diagram the JTree representing arbitrary XDM content.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-128-01 CG to consider using “standard” or some other term instead of “regular” in the file: module.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-128-02 CG to investigate what to say about permissions.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-128-03 NW to compare the file: module against the equivalent XProc 3.1 steps</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-129-01: MK to fix the remaining prose references to MapKeyExpr and MapValueExpr</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-administrivia" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="administrivia"><span class="section-number-2">1.</span> Administrivia</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-administrivia">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-roll-call" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="roll-call"><span class="section-number-3">1.1.</span> Roll call <code>[9/12]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-roll-call">
<p>
Regrets: DB, BTW.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> David J Birnbaum (DB)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Reece Dunn (RD)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Christian Grün (CG)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Joel Kalvesmaki (JK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Michael Kay (MK)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Juri Leino (JLO)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> John Lumley (JWL)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Dimitre Novatchev (DN)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Wendell Piez (WP)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Ed Porter (EP)</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> Bethan Tovey-Walsh (BTW)</li>
<li class="on"><code>[X]</code> Norm Tovey-Walsh (NW) <i>Scribe</i>. <i>Chair</i>.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-agenda" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="agenda"><span class="section-number-3">1.2.</span> Accept the agenda</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-agenda">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../agenda/2025/07-15.html">the agenda</a>.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-approve-minutes" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="approve-minutes"><span class="section-number-3">1.3.</span> Approve minutes of the previous meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-approve-minutes">
<p>
Proposal: Accept <a href="../../minutes/2025/07-08.html">the minutes of the previous meeting</a>. 
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-next-meeting" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="next-meeting"><span class="section-number-3">1.4.</span> Next meeting</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-next-meeting">
<p>
The next meeting is scheduled for 22 July 2025.
</p>

<p>
DB gives regrets.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-actions" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-actions"><span class="section-number-3">1.5.</span> Review of open action items <code>[0/6]</code></h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-actions">
<p>
(Items marked [X] are believed to have been closed via email before
this agenda was posted.)
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-082-02: DN to work with NW to come to agreement on the fn:ranks proposal</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-112-01: JLO to propose a concrete example that uses “.” in a ~%method~s.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-116-01: Add a specific error code for unsupported options on doc and doc-available</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-118-01: MK to make an incorrect type raise an error in #1906</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-123-01: MK to do the set example in XQuery.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-127-01: NW to diagram the JTree representing arbitrary XDM content.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-128-01 CG to consider using “standard” or some other term instead of “regular” in the file: module.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-128-02 CG to investigate what to say about permissions.</li>
<li class="off"><code>[&#xa0;]</code> QT4CG-128-03 NW to compare the file: module against the equivalent XProc 3.1 steps</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-open-pull-requests" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="open-pull-requests"><span class="section-number-3">1.6.</span> Review of open pull requests and issues</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-open-pull-requests">
<p>
This section summarizes all of the issues and pull requests that need to be
resolved before we can finish. See <a href="#technical-agenda">Technical Agenda</a> below for the focus of this
meeting.
</p>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-blocked" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="blocked"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.1.</span> Blocked</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-blocked">
<p>
The following PRs are open but have merge conflicts or comments which
suggest they aren’t ready for action.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2063">#2063</a>: 1996 Lookups, KeySpecifier: Literal, ContextValueRef</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2019">#2019</a>: 1776: XSLT template rules for maps and array</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-1062">#1062</a>: 150bis revised proposal for fn:ranks</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-merge-without-discussion" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="merge-without-discussion"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.2.</span> Merge without discussion</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-merge-without-discussion">
<p>
The following PRs are editorial, small, or otherwise appeared to be
uncontroversial when the agenda was prepared. The chairs propose that
these can be merged without discussion. If you think discussion is
necessary, please say so.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2096">#2096</a>: 2035 Drop unworkable example of recursive record types</li>
</ul>

<p>
Discussion ensued.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JLO: Does it mean that recursive record types are impossible in general?</li>
<li>MK: No record types can be recursive, but you can’t instantiate them with
something that’s cyclic.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Type A can refer to type B, but you can instantiate an A-B-A cycle, even
with functions.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>CG: I proposed an example, is that legal?</li>
</ul>

<pre class="example">
declare record local:a(b as local:b?);
declare record local:b(a as local:a?);
() =&gt; local:a() =&gt; local:b()
</pre>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: You’ve instantiated both record types, but there’s no cycle between
references.</li>
<li>CG: Oh, I see.</li>
<li>MK: You can’t make an A that points to a B that points back to <b>the same A</b>.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of how updating works.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JWL: Is this case that can be determined statically, or is it impossible to
write it syntactically?</li>
<li>MK: It won’t have the effect you think.</li>
<li>WP: I think this is fine.</li>
<li>MK: It seems to be a fairly well known problem in functional languages. They
do have some constructs to get around the problem. But they’re fairly convoluted.</li>
<li>RD: Might be worth adding a note that says you can’t create cyclic instances.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: merge this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-close-without-action" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="close-without-action"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.3.</span> Close without action</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-close-without-action">
<p>
It has been proposed that the following issues be closed without action.
If you think discussion is necessary, please say so.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>Issue <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/2057">#2057</a>: Steps: variable element names</li>
<li>Issue <a href="https://github.com/qt4cg/qtspecs/issues/1307">#1307</a>: For symmetry, add functions array:scan-left and array:scan-right</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: close without further action.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-substantive" class="outline-4">
<h4 id="substantive"><span class="section-number-4">1.6.4.</span> Substantive PRs</h4>
<div class="outline-text-4" id="text-substantive">
<p>
The following substantive PRs were open when this agenda was prepared.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2011">#2011</a>: 675(part): Add XSLT static typing rules for new kinds of XPath expression</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2014">#2014</a>: QT4CG-122-01 Add notes, examples, and rationale for xsl:select</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2019">#2019</a>: 1776: XSLT template rules for maps and array</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2031">#2031</a>: 2025 JNodes</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2037">#2037</a>: 2036 Add rule for streamability of xsl:map</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2043">#2043</a>: 2038 Tweak the rules for fn:apply-templates references to modes</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2071">#2071</a>: 77c deep update</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2083">#2083</a>: 2054 Generalized Path Expressions</li>
<li>PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2094">#2094</a>: 2003 Generalize Map Constructors</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-technical-agenda" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="technical-agenda"><span class="section-number-2">2.</span> Technical agenda</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-technical-agenda">
</div>

<div id="outline-container-h-E26407E8-EB3B-4D13-B605-81347EE4D5FF" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="h-E26407E8-EB3B-4D13-B605-81347EE4D5FF"><span class="section-number-3">2.1.</span> JNodes/Generalized path expressions</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-h-E26407E8-EB3B-4D13-B605-81347EE4D5FF">
<p>
Last week, we agreed to return to this with an eye towards accepting it unless
there are objections.
</p>

<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2083">#2083</a>: 2054 Generalized Path Expressions and PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2031">#2031</a>: 2025 JNodes
</p>

<p>
(I believe that #2083 subsumes #2031, so accepting #2083 should also close
#2031.)
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: Just want to draw your attention to the fact that I responded to several comments.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… The mixed case names are now all lowercase</li>
<li>… Gunther Radamacher’s comment about needing to reserve more function names;
we had both a type and a function called <code>jnode()</code>. I’ve renamed the type as
<code>jnode-type()</code> but we may want to resolve that differently.</li>
<li>… The property names now use “..” instead of “¶”.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>CG: I think it’s a good idea to merge this PR; but it’s so huge. 
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I think that transitive closure functions might need some revisions.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>NW: I think we should merge it.</li>
<li>JK: I’d like to merge it, but I think we need to have a discussion about how
definitions are worded.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: merge this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>

<p>
This obsoletes #2031.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JWL: Is it worth putting something on Slack that we’re making this big change.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-2094" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-2094"><span class="section-number-3">2.2.</span> PR #2094: 2003 Generalize Map Constructors</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-2094">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2094">#2094</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This is confined to a fairly small part of the XPath spec.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… I’ve moved things around a bit.</li>
<li>… The section begins with an example of something you didn’t used to be able
to do.</li>
<li>… The new case is that an <code>ExprSingle</code> can be written without a <code>:</code> and it
must return zero or more map items.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
The example with employee has an error, it should be: <code>{ //employee ! {@id : .} }</code>.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>JWL: Can you use a predicate?</li>
<li>MK: Yes, I’ll add an example.</li>
<li>JLO: One thing that struck me: the map key expression and map value expression
are no longer used by the map constructor expression but are referenced
elsewhere.</li>
<li>MK: I thought I’d dropped all reference to them.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Oh, you’re right. There are.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
ACTION: QT4CG-129-01: MK to fix the remaining prose references to MapKeyExpr and MapValueExpr
</p>

<p>
Some discussion of why it was dropped. Avoiding lookahead was the goal.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>RD: With the key, if you have a sequence of values, are we handling the semantics of that?</li>
<li>MK: The result of atomizing must be a single atomic item otherwise it’s a type error.</li>
<li>JLO: I’d like to be able to put in a variable into a map and have it expand into key and value.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… Previously we said this shouldn’t be allowed because of substitutability</li>
<li>… But we’re so close now. Wouldn’t it be possible?</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: I’m not sure I understand the example.</li>
<li>JLO: I want:</li>
</ul>

<pre class="example">
let $a := 1
let $m := { $a }
</pre>

<p>
to return <code>{"a": 1}</code>
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: Substitutability certainly means you should be able to rename variables without changing expressions.</li>
<li>CG: In this example, <code>$a</code> will be allowed and if it returns a map that will become a map.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-2014" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-2014"><span class="section-number-3">2.3.</span> PR #2014: QT4CG-122-01 Add notes, examples, and rationale for xsl:select</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-2014">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2014">#2014</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR starting with the general rules about where XPath
expressions occur in XSLT.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: There is some reordering of sections.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… “Creating nodes and sequences” has moved into “Callable components”.</li>
<li>… Some examples have been added.</li>
</ul></li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: accept this PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-2019" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-2019"><span class="section-number-3">2.4.</span> PR #2019: 1776: XSLT template rules for maps and array</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-2019">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2019">#2019</a>
</p>

<p>
Not ready yet.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-2037" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-2037"><span class="section-number-3">2.5.</span> PR #2037: 2036 Add rule for streamability of xsl:map</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-2037">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2037">#2037</a>
</p>

<p>
Needs to be reviewed.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-2043" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-2043"><span class="section-number-3">2.6.</span> PR #2043: 2038 Tweak the rules for fn:apply-templates references to modes</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-2043">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2043">#2043</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces this PR.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: We introduced <code>fn:apply-templates()</code> largely so that we could use XPath
array and map constructors and do apply templates in the middle.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… In implementing it, I realized there was a complication that wasn’t really
adding any value: you could make it use the default mode from the static context.</li>
<li>… I don’t think we want to keep the default mode around in every dynamic
context.</li>
<li>… Let’s make it compulsory to say what mode you want to apply templates in
if you’re using the functional form.</li>
<li>… The effect is to remover <code>#default</code> from the list of available modes.</li>
</ul></li>
<li>JWL: Would this apply in an XPath expression that’s in an enclosed mode?</li>
<li>MK Yes.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: accept the PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-pr-2011" class="outline-3">
<h3 id="pr-2011"><span class="section-number-3">2.7.</span> PR #2011: 675(part): Add XSLT static typing rules for new kinds of XPath expression</h3>
<div class="outline-text-3" id="text-pr-2011">
<p>
See PR <a href="https://qt4cg.org/dashboard/#pr-2011">#2011</a>
</p>

<p>
MK introduces the PR.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>MK: This just updates the current table of rules to add some new constructs.
<ul class="org-ul">
<li>… The U-type of a choice item type is defined.</li>
<li>… The table and its description have been expanded.</li>
<li>… OtherwiseExpr has been added.</li>
<li>… Some notational changes have been made.</li>
<li>… StringTemplate has been added.</li>
<li>… ContextValueRef becomes a bit more complicated as a consequence of
generalizing the context item.</li>
<li>… Partial Function Application has been added (with a TODO).</li>
<li>… Deep Lookup needs to be examined again</li>
</ul></li>
<li>MK: It doesn’t address streamability, it just updates the relevant static type information.</li>
<li>JWL: Is adding jnodes going to be about adding map types?</li>
<li>MK: No, they’re a new type.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Proposal: accept the PR.
</p>

<p>
Accepted.
</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-any-other-business" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="any-other-business"><span class="section-number-2">3.</span> Any other business</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-any-other-business">
<p>
Summer vacation?
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: Does the group want to take a vacation?</li>
<li>CG: I’ll be gone the last week of August and the first two weeks of September.</li>
<li>NW: Let’s revisit this next week.</li>
<li>MK: I think we should plan to produce a stable working draft.</li>
<li>NW: I think that’s a good idea. As soon as we feel like the JNodes proposal is
bedded in, perhaps that’s the time.</li>
</ul>

<p>
Some discussion of this in the context of Mike’s Balisage paper.
</p>

<ul class="org-ul">
<li>NW: I think the question of stable draft for reference from papers is easier.
I don’t think we need any sort of group consensus to say
“here’s what the draft was on such-and-such a date.” URIs are cheap.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</div>

<div id="outline-container-adjourned" class="outline-2">
<h2 id="adjourned"><span class="section-number-2">4.</span> Adjourned</h2>
<div class="outline-text-2" id="text-adjourned">
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
